Welcome to Greenhouse Management. I'm Holly Scoggins. This lecture is an overview of the various applications of greenhouses, plus markets for products grown in commercial greenhouses. The commercial greenhouse in the context of this course is used to grow plants and plant products for sale, ideally, at a profit. This is by far the most common use of greenhouses. The crops can be very diverse, as noted in the previous lecture, for marigolds to microgreens, or a combination thereof. The crops are then sold at wholesale, which is business to business, or at retail, directly to the consumer. Wholesale operations tend to be larger, but many small and medium sized operations can be a combination of the two. To vastly oversimplify the upside of each of these markets, retail growers charge a higher price, and thus, have greater profit margins. Wholesale growers sell at a lower price, but often larger volume and don't have to deal with the general public. We'll come back to these markets in a little bit. First, let's look at some other greenhouse applications. Institutional implies the greenhouse is used in some way to further the mission of the institution, not necessarily for profit, but for education and research. However, schools, botanic gardens and even prisons grow plants for educational experiences for their landscapes and displays. And they may, indeed, grow and sell them directly to the public as fundraisers. I know a number of students in this course that have had wonderful hands-on experience at either the middle school, high school, community college, or university level in growing and selling plants-- corporate research and development, or institutional research in plant breeding, production of plant products, and by-products-- and the study of pests and pathogens in related industries, such as agricultural chemical companies all required greenhouses. In most cases, high levels of control are needed to limit fluctuations of temperature, light, and humidity. A normal greenhouse could have a 10 to 15 degree temperature range. A very high tech research house can limit that range to just a couple of degrees. There are also biosecurity regulations at both the institutional and federal level. An example of a protocol could be level two, would cover GMOs that aren't approved for release yet. So any material coming out of a level two area would have to be autoclaved to kill any seeds or pathogens. Level three precautions are much stricter and apply to things like pests and pathogens that haven't been previously found in a specific area, region, or country. This biosecurity level may involve a shower-in and shower-out procedure. And nothing can be taken from the facility. There are many, many more requirements and protocols for these various levels. If you're interested, see the publication linked as a resource in this module. Conservatories first came about in Europe. They're called orangeries. They're places to store tropical and tender plants, such as citrus over the winter. The golden age of conservatories was the 1800s with gorgeous glass houses springing up all over England and northern Europe. They're now a popular part of many public gardens, enabling exhibits and events that draw visitors in every season. Conservatories can provide a variety of custom climates, ranging from a tropical rainforest to a arid desert environment. This is also useful for gardens and other institutions involved in rare or endangered plant conservation and protection. Back to the commercial greenhouse. We've previously discussed the wide variety of crops that could be grown in a greenhouse. Now, we'll take a look at the markets for these products. First, let's talk about the wholesale market. That's business to business. Propagation specialists are simply growing for other growers. Plant propagation is very labor intensive and requires specialized growing areas. You're growing a lot of plants in a relatively small space, often, for only a few weeks. And then, those are sold and shipped. More are started in their place. This is called turning the bench or simply a turn. Propagation specialists are simply growing further growers. Plant propagation is very labor intensive and requires specialized growing areas. You're growing a lot of plants in a relatively small space, often, for only a few weeks. And then, those are sold and shipped. More are then started in their place. This is called turning the bench or simply a turn in the lingo. One of very few standards that exists in the industry is tray size. And that's just the overall dimensions, not the size, shape, or quantity of cells within the tray, which seem to be infinite. Being in the baby plant business is exceedingly hands on, even if the operation has state of the art technology. There's so little growing media around the roots that they can dry out in an hour or two on a sunny day, where they can stay wet and soggy, inviting all kinds of pathogens if it's a cool and cloudy day. Successful propagators understand there's both a science and an art to young plant management. Consider it a career option if you're particularly good at it. Demand can fluctuate, based on sales of the finished product. And there are lots of costs involved in shipping. Lots of propagators do ship overnight via FedEx or similar. And it can get expensive. Most wholesale floor culture operations are relatively large. Thus, profit margins are reduced compared to retail. So volume becomes critical to make a profit. Regarding starter plants, there's a continuum of those who start all their own plants to those who purchase just about all their plugs and liners from propagators. Most wholesale greenhouses sell to garden centers. This is a very broad category. It may be part of some other business, such as a big box home improvement store or a seasonal sales area at a southern state's or some other ag supply store. Or it could be a standalone year-round garden center. These are often known as Independent Garden Centers-- or IGCs. You've also seen seasonal bedding plant displays outside of grocery stores. Many also have a dedicated floral area. Florists don't sell just cut flowers. They also sell potted plants for home decor and gifts. Last, but not least, is the commercial landscape trade. Landscape businesses purchase seasonal bedding plants and perennials in relatively large quantities. So even retail growers usually offer them a significant discount. Growers usually love their landscapers. Products are usually pre-booked, so it's a known quantity that will be picked up at a specific time. Talk wholesale produce-- greenhouse grown produce can be sold daily, seasonally, or by contract to other businesses for resale or use. Cooperatives and distributors garner products from multiple sources to offer to their customers. The farm to table movement-- smart chefs are clamoring for local, sustainably produced vegetables and fruit. However, there can be a lack of consistency in demand and the challenges in coordinating harvest times to the needs of the restaurant. About the retail market for greenhouse-grown produce-- as with field grown vegetables, products can be sold directly to the public through many venues. But as we discussed previously, having a greenhouse can greatly extend the season for all these market scenarios. A farm stand is a retail outlet, usually, directly on the farm property. It can feature both fresh produce and value added products made on the farm, such as jams, sauces, and more. Farmers markets are a great, low overhead way to get your produce to the people. This interest in farmers markets has just exploded over the last few years. Know that some markets cannot accommodate all the growers that want to sell there. And, often, they have a vendor waiting list. Community Supported Agriculture-- or CSAs-- are basically a form of contract growing. Produce is pre-sold through subscription programs and is picked up by the customer on a weekly basis. And though, there any niche you pick markets, growers generally want to control all the harvesting themselves. There are food safety issues in letting the general public into the greenhouse. So this doesn't happen very often. For more on food safety regulations for greenhouse growers, see the additional resources within this module. For floriculture crops, such as bedding plants, perennials, and flowering potted plants, your hometown retail greenhouse sells what they grow on site. Sometimes, they'll supplement their product mix with additional landscape plants, such as trees and shrubs. Some retailers keep production and sales separate. But small growers often let customers into most of their greenhouses. Once you start adding additional non-plant items-- these are called hard goods-- such as gardening gear, containers, fertilizer, shovels. Seasonal decor-- things like that-- the retail greenhouse moves into the realm of garden center. There's some extraordinary garden centers out there, often called destination garden centers. For example, Merrifield Garden Center's flagship store in Gainesville, has not only the full array of plant and gardening means, but furniture and lighting, a wine and gourmet food shop, an on site cafe, and a dog park. All this value added stuff can help sustain sales throughout the seasons. Because the majority-- at least 75% or more of yearly sales of plants occurs during a span of about three months during the spring gardening frenzy. Some greenhouse manufacturers specialize in designing and building retail greenhouses. It needs to be attractive, safe, and easy to get around in, from both the product movement and customer's point of view. Wide isles are a must. You want it to be as easy as possible for your customers to fill up their carts. Ventilation and air movement are essential to keeping temperatures comfortable. And in upcoming lectures, we're going to talk about how challenging temperature management can be in a greenhouse. Back to the garden center greenhouse. It also has to be a secure environment. It's a retail establishment with virtually transparent walls. So in summary, beyond the standard commercial greenhouse, there are specialized applications for greenhouses, such as research and development, education, conservation, and display. Commercial greenhouse markets include wholesale, retail, or a combination of the two. And there's some important differences in these markets between floor culture and vegetable production. Be sure to take a look at the additional resources posted within this module for more information. 
